---
layout: post
title: "Issue 3: Undergraduate Focus"
pdate: "14 Oct, 2024"
---

>We are mostly Undergraduate workers--how our union operates should reflect that. We exist in a higher ed labor context that has long prioritized the needs of white-collar academics (Tenured Faculty, Faculty, Adjuncts, Graduate Assistants). These workers make more money have more secure job prospects and generate more dues revenue. I want us to focus our efforts on Undergraduate workers--that means the OSE campaign, that means tutors, peer advisors, library assistants: the workers who don't do direct instruction or research and are likewise undervalued by the university and, historically, by the higher ed labor movement.

The Educational Student Employee bargaining unit is made up of around 900 undergrads and 200 grads, our Union's leadership should reflect this proportion, but more importantly, how our union functions should reflect this. That is not to say that we should de-prioritize the needs of graduate workers, it is rather an acknowledgment that undergraduate workers have no champion except ourselves. The graduate labor movement is mature--it has proven its effectiveness in contract campaigns and in its dues revenue for unions--it has champions. WAWU should be the champion of undergraduate workers in Washington, we should be leading the way. In many ways we're already doing this.

Within the higher ed labor movement WAWU must make it abundantly clear that unions should pursue undergrad unionism. And that's a hard sell. WAWU will not be a wealthy local, WAWU will not have its own staff, WAWU will pay the International pennies. So, why should the UAW, why should the UE, why should UNITE HERE pursue undergraduate unionism? Because it's not about the dues revenues our locals bring in, it's about what a future where every undergrad worker is unionized means for the labor movement.

>...we could see every new worker coming to work with a union background, with a knowledge of how to stand up and fight back.

Since our strike, hundreds, maybe even a thousand undergrad workers have experienced going on strike, walking a picket line, but six months ago maybe only a dozen undergrad workers at Western had ever struck, maybe a few dozen had ever walked a picket line. Three years ago few undergrad workers had ever started a union campaign, had ever maintained a recognition campaign, had ever made collective change in their workplace. Now, undergrad workers on campus and undergrads generally know what a union is, we know what a union can do, we know how to join together with our coworkers. The value of this is indescribable: it means that across the professional and higher-educated industries we could see every new worker coming to work with a union background, with a knowledge of how to stand up and fight back. Undergrad unionism can be the key to mass class-consciousness in these so-called "United States."

Why am I, in an election decided by ESEs, saying we need to focus on OSEs? Because our union is incomplete without the recognition of the OSE unit. Our union is incomplete when our coworkers have different rights than us because of an arbitrary decision to classify us as an ESE and them as an OSE. Our union is incomplete if we maintain this white-collar / blue-collar division of rights. We need to focus on OSEs because the University values OSEs so much less than ESEs and improving things for OSEs means improving things for everyone else too.

Focusing on undergrad workers means intentional and strategic staff support for OSEs, mentorship for OSE organizing, the acceptance and adaptation to the fact that OSE workplaces may need to be approached differently from ESE workplaces. Focusing on undergrad workers means centering undergrad voices.